AGENT  / COMPANY RELATIONSHIPS AND AGENT AUTHORITY

The concept of “agency” is the legal relationship between two parties when one of the parties acts on behalf of another. This concept does not just apply to the insurance field. However, it may be applied to the insurance business to illustrate the relationship between an insurer and a producer. For example, this legal relationship exists when a producer (i.e., an agent) represents an insurer. The insurer is referred to as the principal. The producer may be referred to as the agent or authorized representative. When the producer / agent acts within the scope of his or her authority, the insurer or principal is bound or responsible for such action. There are several types of agent authority in existence:
ACTUAL OR EXPRESS AUTHORITY
Expressed or Actual authority is the type of authority an agent possesses which is defined or contained in the agent contract or agreement. When this contract is in force, the insurer is responsible for the acts of its agents / producers. This agreement specifies the actual powers and functions of the agent. This type of authority is generally in written form. Producers or agents are allowed to solicit appointments, select or reject risks in the field, complete applications, collect premiums, submit applications and premiums to the insurer and other various duties. Express authority is extended to a producer in an agency contract or agreement.
IMPLIED AUTHORITY
Implied or “unwritten” authority is not specifically identified in the agency agreement. However, it is an extension of an agent’s regular duties (i.e., authority exercised by the producer as a result of prior experience). Any business activities that are usual and customary are implied. For instance, it is implied that an agent (i.e., producer) who solicits insurance is permitted to sign the application, or it is implied that the producer may ask an applicant questions concerning the health history of the proposed insured.

APPARENT AUTHORITY
Apparent authority is the type of authority the insurance buying public perceives the agent possesses based on his or her actions. In other words, this authority is not given to the producer but the public believes that the agent possesses this authority. A producer might also possess lingering apparent authority as well.


