APPROPRIATE CLAIM PRACTICES

Insurers must also, by law, maintain reserves to pay covered claims. They must pay all covered claims in a timely fashion. Insurers are not permitted to engage in any unfair claim practices. The following are unfair claim practices in which an insurer should not engage. If committed by an insurer, the Commissioner may suspend the insurer’s certificate of authority. Any employees of the insurer who are responsible for unfair claim practices may be disciplined as well. Some of the more common types of unfair claim practices include:
 Misrepresenting insurance policy provisions or pertinent facts concerning coverages provided.
 Refusing to pay claims without conducting an equitable and fair investigation based on all available information.
 Failing to effectuate a prompt, fair, and equitable settlement of claims in which liability has become reasonably clear.
 Failing to adopt and implement reasonable standards for the prompt investigation of covered claims or failing to affirm or deny coverage for a claim within a reasonable time after a proof of loss has been submitted to the insurer.
 Failing to acknowledge and act reasonably and promptly upon communications with respect to claims.
 Seeking to pay insurance claims for less than the amount stipulated in the policy.
 Failing to provide claim or proof of loss forms in a timely fashion (i.e., timely payment of claims).
 Forcing insureds to institute legal action to recover amounts due under a policy by offering less than the amounts ultimately recovered in actions brought by insureds.
 Unfairly refusing to pay claims or making known to an insured that the insurer has a policy of contesting claims by going to arbitration, which may induce the claimant to accept a lower amount to which he or she is entitled.
 Failing to settle claims promptly after relevant information has been collected by the insurer.
 Failing to promptly provide a reasonable response to an insured or beneficiary with relation to the facts or applicable law regarding denial of a claim.

