CLASS ACTIONS IN A LITIGIOUS SOCIETY

Here’s where it gets tempting to write a blistering attack on the legal profession, blame all the woes of the agent and industry on aggressive lawyers, or go for the emotional close! But it’s not as simple as that. It is, however, as simple as this: if there had been no abuses, there would be no industry woes. If there had been no mislead consumers, there would be no fined and imprisoned former agents. Attorneys are uncovering the problems, they are not creating them So the climate changes over the past few decades created a perfect environment for the class action frenzy the financial services industry has witnessed. All the ingredients have been there, cooking for some time. Plenty of lawyers, plenty of money, plenty of demanding customers, and plenty of abuses waiting to be uncovered. All that was needed was a little stirring and a little more heat.
Things reached the boiling point in 1993 when an article appeared in The Wall Street Journal reporting that a number of agents for a major life insurance company complained they were terminated when they refused to participate in selling “retirement plans” to nurses. The plan was life insurance marketed as a “private pension” plan. The former agents believed the practice was improper and claimed they were fired when they refused to participate. The article attracted the attention of a well-known attorney with class-action experience and the rest, as they say, is history.
Again, it would be easy to blame the attorney for stirring up a hornet’s nest, but the problems were there. Here’s an excerpt from an interview with plaintiff’s attorney, Ron Parry that appeared in Best’s Review at the time:
“Agents also told us they were trained never to use the word “premium,” to always use the term “deposit” instead of “premium.” All those allegations were attracting attention in the press. So when we filed the class action, it attracted even more attention. My name was published in the paper a few times. The phone calls started in late 1993 and haven’t stopped since. I’ve had more than six calls this morning and it isn’t even 11 a.m. yet.”
Class action lawsuits presented a huge problem for the insurance industry. There was little that companies could do to protect themselves from the onslaught. All it took was for a few disgruntled policyholders to seek legal remedy for a wrong by an agent or company. Once the right attorney decided that real problem existed and other policyholders may also have been harmed in the same way, the door was wide open.
Another article in the same issue of Best’s Review discussed how the cost of mounting a class action suit had been declining in recent years. One reason given was “the communication explosion, including computers and the Internet.” The article described a database of legal evidence related to class-action lawsuits maintained by The Association of American Trial Lawyers maintains for east access by attorneys involved in cases — or hoping to get involved in one. One group, Public Citizen Litigation Group, located in Washington, D.C., even sold a “litigation kit” to help inexperienced lawyers get started in the class-action business.
Once a sufficient number of individuals were identified for a class action to be certified, negotiations began in earnest. Most companies, seeking to avoid the legal expenses and bad publicity of a court fight, settled as quickly as possible. Sarah Cheaure, executive director of Citizens against Lawsuit Abuse, said at the time, “The company has to pay out because 99.999% of the time, it’s cheaper to settle than it is to fight it.”



