ETHICS IN THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY

Within a profession, ethics refers to the code of conduct that governs that group’s actions such as how members interact with outsiders and with one another. Lawyers, for example, are bound by a code of legal ethics that, among other restrictions, forbids them from revealing anything their clients tell them. Members of the public know that they may confide their deepest secrets to their attorneys without fear of disclosure.
In spite of this, the public sometimes views lawyers with suspicion. Unfortunately, some people view insurance agents and stockbrokers in a similar fashion. Various scandals, such as the Ponzi scheme perpetuated by Bernard Madoff have made many people wary of the securities industry. In addition, the recession and its impact on investor’s portfolios have aided fraudsters, who play on hopes of reversing losses. It is therefore especially important that industry members be aware of their responsibility to behave ethically. When insurance agents demonstrate a lack of ethics in business dealings, the entire industry may suffer from loss of reputation and stigma. Adhering to ethical standards upholds the integrity of individual registered representatives, as well as the industry as a whole. Industry practices, regulations, and standards provide the best starting point to determine what is an appropriate and proper way to conduct business.
We develop our inclination toward ethical (or unethical) behavior at an early age. Some believe our lifelong ethical bent is basically formed by age seven. We typically are influenced by a number of individuals and institutions. Parents or other significant adults in our life can have a profound impact on the way we see our responsibility towards others. The way we are treated by important adults, and the way we see them treat others, influences our perceptions of what is right and what is wrong in dealing with other people. The school and church or synagogue we attend, the organizations we join, all contribute to our ethical underpinnings.
All of the great religions of the world teach an ethical principle of one form or another. Most are a variation of the familiar “golden rule.” For Christians, “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you” summarizes it rather succinctly. There is a story of a challenge offered to a famous teacher, Rabbi Hillel, who lived about the time of Jesus. The challenger asked the rabbi if he would summarize everything important about Judaism while standing on one foot. Rabbi Hillel said, “That which is hurtful to thee do not to thy neighbor. This is the whole doctrine. The rest is commentary.”
Empathy is a key component of how we treat others. Native Americans are said to have had a teaching that held you should never judge another until you have “walked two moons in his moccasins.” The concepts of empathy towards others and treating others as you would want to be treated are the foundation of ethical behavior.
But what does ethics really mean to the hard working financial services professional? For purposes of our discussion, let’s agree that ethics and ethical behavior refer to a kind of internal “moral compass” we all have to varying degrees. This “moral compass” guides our interactions with other people. For agents, “other people” refers to prospects, clients, home office personnel, and a host of others who are impacted by the way he or she conducts day to day business. Ethics for the agent, then, means treating prospects, clients, home office personnel — and even other agents — as they, themselves, would like to be treated. Such treatment includes honesty, fairness, and compassion.
Different people are comfortable with different types of behavior. An individual’s own standard of behavior can run the gamut from acceptable to beyond reproach. It is important to understand the concept of ethics in order to develop your own standard of conduct for personal and business matters. One’s ethics establish his or her reputation in the industry. One’s ethics determines how your colleagues view you and how they will deal with you. A licensed producer with a reputation for pushing clients into poor purchases may lose business through negative word of mouth. Customers who lose money on unsuitable purchases do more than give a negative assessment of performance to their friends and family. They will complain to the regulators and file arbitrations. These actions then become part of the producer’s disciplinary history, which is available to the public through the office of the Commissioner of Insurance in a particular State.
Producers (and their insurers) must take the time to think about what constitutes an appropriate standard of behavior before they find themselves in situations that test it. Often you will not have the time to reflect, once a problem arises that requires you to make an ethical decision. A response that may seem appropriate at the moment may prove to have serious repercussions down the road. Producers have a fiduciary duty and responsibility to the consumer and to the insurer with whom it places insurance business.
Producers must also consider how their personal ethics may differ from their insurer’s official code of behavior. Decisions made in the heat of the moment may reflect the producer’s personal standards and not that of the insurer. A producer may have issues with a course of action, even though it is consistent with the insurer’s policies or management’s idea of permissible conduct. Financial services professionals should cultivate an awareness of their company’s policies, their own personal feelings about what is right, and their manager’s opinions as well. This will help one to develop a standard of behavior that will serve him or her well, not only in conducting day-to-day business, but in dealing with tricky or puzzling situations that may occasionally arise.
Firms should take care to develop and cultivate an ethical work environment. Establishing procedures and policies to make employees aware of what the firm expects in the way of ethical conduct is just the first step. A firm must provide a means for employees to seek assistance if they are being pressured into doing something unethical. Policies must clearly spell out the proper transaction procedures and rules, and the firm must make employees aware of the importance of full compliance. Management must be trained to set an example, and employees who act ethically must be recognized and rewarded.
Making ethical and legal conduct a matter of lip service, without any tangible endorsement or support of this conduct by management, does not create an ethical environment at a firm. The firm with a reputation for high standards of conduct will typically attract employees that appreciate this in a working environment. Firms must earn this reputation with conscious policies of training, monitoring, and support in the area of ethical conduct.
Is conduct that is legal always ethical? Clearly, the answer is no. Conversely, in a few cases, someone may commit an illegal act for commendable reasons. Since the ethics of an individual may be determined by that person’s personal moral compass, the assessment of what is ethical is not always cut-and-dried.

