ETHICAL MARKETING PRACTICES


All insurers and their producers would agree that there are ethical implications to the way in which insurance products are marketed. Acts that are not ethical might include but are not limited to: taking advantage of the elderly when selling certain types of insurance; misrepresenting the benefits, provisions and coverage in a policy; defaming a competitor; comparing policies unfairly and inaccurately; illegally inducing a consumer to surrender an existing policy; misappropriating or commingling premiums collected with personal funds; falsifying information on an application submitted to an insurer; or engaging in rebating. Ethical marketing practices can be described as practices that emphasize competent, trustworthy, and responsible practices and acts that exhibit integrity and fairness to consumers.
Insurers, no matter what products they market, have historically had a poor reputation in terms of ethics. This less than sterling reputation is even more pronounced in the life insurance business. Life insurers have attempted to rectify this situation by creating the Insurance Marketplace Standards Association. This association exists to promote fair and ethical treatment of policyholders on the part of life insurance companies. Participation in this association is voluntary but many insurers participate since there are few ethical governmental standards in existence today. In order to be certified by this association, an insurer must adhere to a set of principles regarding ethical market conduct. These principles are not exclusive to the life insurance industry. The first of these, as previously mentioned is the “Golden Rule”(i.e., do unto others, etc.). All insurers should provide the same quality service to its consumers that it would demand for itself, with competence, fairness and honesty. Other ethical principles that should be embraced by insurers include but are not limited to:
FAIR COMPETITION
Insurers should also engage in competition fairly. Insurers who do not police their sales force or hire intermediaries who are competent and trustworthy do a disservice to the industry and consumers.
ADVERTISING
The Commissioner shall regulate all advertising in this State with regard to the sale or marketing of insurance, annuities, and endowments. Advertising includes any making, publishing, disseminating, circulating, or placing at the disposal of the public any notices, circulars, direct mailers, or other tools which describe the benefits of a policy or the services provided by an insurer and its licensees. Advertisements also include the following:
 Prepared sales talks utilized by a licensee
 Audiovisual aids used in a sales presentation
 Radio and television announcements or ads
 Newspaper and magazine ads
 Circulars or “flyers” distributed by mail or in person
 Billboards, signs, and other like types of advertisements
Advertising materials should always be written in a manner that can be easily comprehended by the average consumer. The contents of advertising materials must be true and not misleading.



