MARKET CONDUCT

Market conduct involves the measurement of an insurer and its producers with regard to marketing insurance products to consumers. Producers are required to act in a fiduciary capacity in their dealings with consumers and the insurer to whom they place insurance business. Producers must act with utmost good faith with regard to insurance transactions. Insurers must be examined at least once every five years to determine their financial condition, their ability to meet its obligations, if they have complied with State law, the equity of their dealings with policyholders and any other information relating to their business practices and methods. These are sometimes referred to as market conduct examinations. There are several types of market conduct examinations including:
(1) comprehensive examinations to review all aspects of an insurer’s insurance operations;
(2) specific examinations focusing on specific areas of an insurer’s operations;
(3) examinations to ensure insurer compliance with the determinations of previous examinations;
(4) other specialized examinations for specialty or alternative insurers or providers.
MARKET CONDUCT EXAMINATIONS
State insurance law stipulates that the Commissioner has the power to examine or audit an insurer for solvency. The Commissioner has the power to examine every licensed domestic insurer in this state at least once every five years. This means that authorized insurers must be audited at least once every five years to determine their financial condition or solvency, their ability to meet financial obligations (i.e., payment of death benefits), if they have complied with State law, the equity of their dealings with policyholders and any other information relating to their business practices and methods. These are sometimes referred to as market conduct examinations. In addition, the Commissioner may examine an insurer or person to make sure that either is not engaging in any unfair marketing or sales practices.
DISCLOSURE LETTERS AND FORMS
The purpose of state laws regarding disclosure letters and forms is to require insurers to deliver information to purchasers of insurance which will improve the buyer’s ability to:
(1) select the most appropriate plan of insurance for his needs;
(2) improve the buyer’s understanding of the basic features of the policy which has been purchased or which is under consideration; and
(3) improve the ability of the buyer to evaluate the relative costs of similar plans of insurance.
All insurers are subject to specific disclosure requirements as well. The insurer must provide a Buyer’s Guide and a Policy Summary to all prospective purchasers prior to accepting the applicant’s initial premium or premium deposit, unless the policy contains an unconditional refund provision of at least ten days, in which case the Buyer’s Guide and Policy Summary must be delivered with the policy or prior to delivery of the policy. The insurer must provide a Buyer’s Guide and a Policy Summary to any prospective purchaser upon request. Following the sales interview, the insurer must send to the applicant a disclosure letter which summarizes the matters discussed during the presentation and the decisions reached by the applicant. All insurers must maintain at its home or principal office a complete file containing one copy of each disclosure document authorized by the insurer. The file must contain one copy of each authorized form for a period of three years following the date of its last authorized use. Terms such as financial planner, investment advisor, financial consultant, or financial counseling may not be used to imply that the insurance agent is generally engaged in any advisory business in which compensation is unrelated to sales, unless this is actually the case. Any reference to policy dividend must include a statement that dividends are not guaranteed. A system which does not recognize the time value of money through the use of appropriate interest adjustments may not be used for comparing the cost of two or more life insurance policies. This type of system may be used for the purpose of demonstrating the cash-flow pattern of a policy if the presentation is accompanied by a statement disclosing that the presentation does not recognize that, because of interest, a dollar in the future has less value than a dollar today.

