THE RISE OF CONSUMER PROTECTION

In the good old days of “buyer beware,” if you were “smooth-talked” into buying a poor product, your reaction might have been, “How could I have been so stupid? I’ll never buy anything from that outfit again!” Today, a similar experience might cause you to suddenly recall a recent television advertisement for a local law firm that specializes in product liability cases. Check your yellow pages. They’re full of advertisements for friendly lawyers willing to help. “No fee unless we win your case!”

Many people mark the beginning of the consumer protection age with the 1960s book, Unsafe at Any Speed, by a then-unknown lawyer named Ralph Nader. In his book, Nader made a case against auto companies, General Motors in particular, claiming they built unsafe cars, which put drivers and passengers at risk of injury and death. One result of Nader’s book was the demise of the Chevrolet Corvair. Publication of Unsafe at Any Speed, and the ensuing ruckus it caused, was the first time anyone had taken on the auto industry on such a grand scale and won. With his book, Ralph Nader ushered in a new area of consumer protection and created a brand new occupation — the “consumer advocate.”

But Ralph Nader didn’t change the world single handedly. It was already changing. Earlier, Vance Packard had written a book, The Hidden Persuaders, which described the influence of advertising on consumers. In this book, The Affluent Society, written in 1958, John Kenneth Galbraith likewise argued that advertising is manipulative and causes people to buy things they really do not need or want. Oh yes, suspicion of marketers and sellers was already taking root well before Nader.

Change was accelerating for other reasons, too. By the 1950s and 1960s, communication technology was already beginning a long revolution that continues to this day. You remember the 1950s Sputnik and the 1960’s man on the moon. Better, faster communication, like the Internet and email, makes it much more difficult to get away with shoddy products and poor service in this day and age. Disappointed customers continue telling others about it. Today, a disappointed customer can inform many more people, and do so a great deal faster.

Quality in manufacturing and customer service has been improving dramatically too, thanks to the work of people like W. Edwards Deming, J.M. Juran, Genichi Taguchi, and others. By the 1980s, total quality management (TQM) was becoming a way of doing business for a lot of companies, in a lot of industries around the world. The focus on quality and continuous improvement raised the bar for every product and service provider as it raised customer expectations.

Meanwhile, consumer advocacy developed into a fine art and a major influence on our society. Many states created a department of consumer advocacy, or a consumer ombudsman, to fight the good fight against consumer rip off and fraud. Perhaps you have heard of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. What would Willy Loman think of that?

Subtly, over the past few decades, consumers have been transformed from passive purchasers of goods and services, putting up with whatever they received, into informed negotiators who demand quality products, value, and good service. Along the way, another development took place that helped pave the agent’s road to ethics, compliance and market conduct. The rule against attorney advertising disappeared. Add to that an abundance (some would say an overabundance) of law school graduates in recent decades and, suddenly, there is a new sales force in town. They’re selling their skill at picking pockets — deep pockets; and they’re prospecting in the agent’s back yard. By the 1990s, the new age of the consumer had fully dawned, bringing with it a new breed of customer. One that is better informed, more sophisticated, more demanding, and more litigious.
