CONSUMER UNDERSTANDING

We mentioned earlier that, if you were the typical new recruit into this business, you probably became your first insurance sale. It’s very common for new agents to become excited about the product because they finally understand it! But think about it. How much effort did you put into gaining that understanding? Hours in a classroom and more hours at home studying for your State’s insurance licensing exam. Possibly weeks of training by your company, or through LUTC or other industry provided courses. There is no question about it. Insurance is a difficult product to understand. Prospects rarely understand it, and there is no way you’re going to fully educate them in a one to two hour interview. An understanding of insurance as a financial tool is not usually enhanced by producing a twenty-page computerized illustration during the interview. Pages and pages of numbers may simply overwhelm the prospect and make it even more difficult to understand the real benefits of owning insurance. Some prospects become paralyzed by the data overflow.
The second problem exacerbated by the computer illustration is its potential for abuse in the hands of an unscrupulous individual. Granted, the unscrupulous agent, could mislead people using the pocket rate book, but the computer, with its ability to produce illustrations using virtually any assumptions about interest rates, mortality costs and expenses, really gives the con artist a leg up on the prospect. The potential for abuse has led many companies to limit the agent’s flexibility to illustrate unrealistic assumptions. Given most prospects do not understand the product or the illustration, and are probably somewhat intimidated by them, the door is wide open for abuse nevertheless. The unethical agent, in an attempt to help the prospect make sense of all the data on the page, may find it’s easy to draw his attention to the one or two really important numbers. Somehow the pen always finds its way over to the column with the highest interest assumption, and the lowest mortality and expense assumptions, to the exclusion of all the other information contained in the illustration.
So the ethical agent today faces the real challenge of using a complicated looking illustration of a difficult to understand product in a way that genuinely helps prospects make good decisions. To do this, the agent must help the prospect understand the big picture of how insurance moves the prospect toward his or her financial goals, and then use the illustration to help define important details about how the product works. It’s incumbent upon the agent to reveal to the prospect the risks involved. Life insurance cannot be sold as the guarantor of peace of mind and security if the plan is set up to be seriously underfunded in the future. The security offered by life insurance is real but the policy must not be set on a dead end course from the start. There is no way a typical prospect can know this. If the agent chooses to conceal pertinent facts about the program as illustrated, or deliberately sets out to mislead the prospect by manipulating the illustration, the poor prospect won’t have a chance!

