ETHICAL BEHAVIOR AND GOOD MORAL STANDARDS

It is paramount for an insurance producer to engage in ethical behavior when conducting insurance transactions. All producers must follow a specific code of conduct and meet moral standards when conducting all insurance transactions. A producer must place the consumer’s interest ahead of his or her own, stay current with the constant changes in the insurance field through the completion of continuing education courses and offer quality insurance protection through financially stable insurance companies. A minimum degree of competence is achieved when a producer completes pre-licensing training and passes a State licensing examination. The Commissioner of Insurance will not issue an insurance license (i.e., certificate of authority) until specific requirements are satisfied and the producer candidate is competent and trustworthy. To be considered an ethical producer the holder of the license must maintain his or her integrity and perform insurance duties in a fiduciary capacity. As mentioned previously, an insurance producer possesses a fiduciary responsibility to his or her clients and to the insurer with which they place insurance business.
The public must be aware of the financial standing of insurers with which they do business by studying its solvency and liquidity. The primary criteria that should used when selecting an insurer with which to conduct business is its financial security, financial rating and its history of paying claims in a timely and equitable fashion. Policyholder service is also an important consideration. Determining where an insurer invests its premium is an important consideration in selecting an insurer. Purchasing insurance from insurers that invest in high risk investments (i.e., junk bonds) may not be wise. This is why it is imperative for the consumer to review the financial strength of insurers by utilizing tools such as A.M. Best, Standard and Poor’s, Weiss Research and other rating publications to determine such financial strength (i.e., the highest rating is A+). The solvency of an insurer is an important issue since this involves the assets of an insurer being greater than its liabilities. Liquidity involves the ability of the insurer to convert assets quickly to cash for any purpose including the payment of losses and other expenses.

