EVERY AGENT'S DUTY

Meeting the demands of industry regulators, as difficult as that might be at times, is the moral obligation of every insurance company, and every insurance professional as well. Besides, it is the law!
Having said that following the laws and other regulations is the moral obligation of every producer, it follows that it’s every agent’s duty to be familiar with and comprehend those laws. Most laws are straight forward. They revolve around basic principles of honesty, suitability and full disclosure. As discussed earlier, laws and regulations are largely an attempt to codify ethical behavior.
Knowing the insurance laws is the first step. If you are an experienced producer, you might find it interesting to take your State insurance examination again. Many State insurance exams include sections on State laws and the powers of the State Commissioner. In lieu of retaking the test, borrow the State examination preparation book and review it again. You may be surprised at what you don’t know about your State’s rules and regulations related to agent conduct.
Most insurance regulation revolves around disclosure and documentation. This makes sense, when viewed from the regulator’s perspective. If regulators have been charged with protecting consumer interests, it’s logical that they would create rules and regulations they believe help inform consumers. It’s also logical they would want insurance companies and agents to be able to demonstrate that they are complying with the rules. Disclosure is the goal of most industry regulation, and documentation is the evidence they have that the goal is being pursued by the companies and their representatives.
When you think of regulation in this way, it all begins to come together. Think of ethics as “doing the right thing” and compliance as “documenting that you have done the right thing.” Granted, plenty of regulations fall far short of the goal of informing the consumer and many even add to the confusion. But remember, the regulators are empowered to speak for the insurance consuming public, and the industry and its representatives are compelled to listen.

