KEYWORDS: ETHICS AND PRODUCERS

Binding Receipt: Also referred to as an unconditional receipt, issuance of a binding receipt means that coverage becomes effective as soon as the premium is collected by the producer.
Code of Ethics: A set of official standards of conduct that the members of a group are expected to uphold.
Commission: The payment a producer receives from an insurer for selling an insurance policy.
Commissioner of Insurance: The person in charge of administering and enforcing the laws and rules related to insurance in a state.
Compliance: Documenting that you are doing the right things.
Conflicts of Interest: Involve the abuse, actual or potential, of the trust placed in you as a professional.
Continuing Education: Courses that must be taken by a producer as part of their license renewal. These courses ensure that the producer continually increases their knowledge for the benefit of the customer.
Duty: The moral obligation to diligently act in accordance with the laws, standards and recognized customs of society.
Errors and Omissions Insurance: Covers the malpractice or negligence of producers.
Ethics: Moral principles that govern a person’s behavior.
Fairness: Following established and accepted standards, and avoiding personal judgments on others.
Fiduciary: A person or organization who acts on behalf of another person. A fiduciary puts their clients’ interest ahead of their own.
Honesty: To be straightforward and sincere.
Insurance Transaction: The act of selling, soliciting, or negotiating contracts of insurance.
Liquidity: The ability of the insurer to convert assets quickly to cash for any purpose including the payment of losses and other expenses.
NAIC: The National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
Premium: The amount an insurer charges for insurance coverage.
Solvency: The assets of an insurer being greater than its liabilities.
Suitability of Product: Means that the producer and insurer must make sure that the purchase of certain insurance policies are beneficial for the purchaser.
Trustworthy: Being dependable and reliable to do the right thing.

