POLICY ILLUSTRATIONS

A minor miracle occurred in the early seventies that revolutionized the insurance selling business at the time, changing it forever. Some very smart people developed a way to miniaturize electronics, making the pocket-sized calculator a reality. It was small, fast, easy to utilize and it always contained the correct and proper information! Oh, if only the world could have remained unchanged after that. To be set for life, agents would have only to go out and buy new shirts with two pockets, one for the rate book and one for the calculator.
The reality is that the same science that brought us the pocket-sized calculator went on to create the super computers that evolved into the powerful desktop computer and laptop computers familiar to most five-year olds today. Willy Loman could never, even in his wildest dreams, have imagined an insurance sales person making calls with a book-sized computer under his arm rather than a rate book. Even today, our industry is still learning how to best link the power of the computer and the power of persuasion. It is a strange combination, when you think of it — a coldly logical tool like the computer, injected into a sales interview situation requiring sensitivity, warmth, and often, emotion rather than logic. An interesting combination to say the least.
Without a doubt, the biggest impact of the computer on the agent has been the development of the policy illustration. With the advent of the computerized illustration, for the first time, a prospect could be shown a hypothetical projection of how his policy might perform year by year into the future. At first, agents sent illustration requests to the home office where giant computers spit out the illustrations that were then mailed to the agent. If the illustration didn’t match the prospect’s needs exactly, no problem. One could simply double the values or cut them in half — whatever it took to get a match. Besides, the agent still had the rate book, so calculating the correct premium for a different amount was not a problem. Before long, however, computers developed to the point where the agency office could have them on-site, cutting down on the mail time. Amazingly, computers continued to develop until they reached the point where every agent could carry one as he called on prospects. All of this happened in the space of scarcely a decade. It has been estimated that today’s agents carry more computer power with them on calls than the home office computer department had at its disposal only ten years ago!
The power of the computer also permitted the development of highly flexible products like universal and variable life insurance. Before the computer revolution, it was simply impossible for a company to keep track of insurance policies that were as flexible as today’s products. In the old days, if you bought a policy at age 35, ten years later it had exactly the same value as every other 45-year-old policyholder who had purchased the same product at age 35.
Today, every life policy issued by a company could conceivably have a different death benefit and cash value from day one. The flexibility of modern insurance products is a tremendous benefit for the insurance consumer — but it’s a double-edged sword. The ability to flex premiums, change death benefit amount, and choose different investment accounts for cash value, has become both the biggest advantage and biggest disadvantage of life insurance products today. There are two ways that modern flexible products and sophisticated illustrations have backfired, to some extent, on the industry.
