REBATING

Historical Perspective
Rebating life insurance premiums wasn’t always illegal. In fact, there was a time when the practice was quite wide-spread. So wide-spread that it figured prominently in one of the biggest scandals to ever hit our industry. The market conduct scandals of the late 1800s resulted in the turn of the century Armstrong Committee Investigation of the insurance industry, which, in turn, resulted in many of the life insurance laws and regulations we currently operate under.
It’s sometimes hard to believe that the giant life insurance business we know today was once a fledgling industry. The history of the life insurance business in America is as old as the country itself. The first American Life Insurance Company was organized in 1759 in Philadelphia and was called “The Corporation for Relief of Poor and Distressed Presbyterian Ministers and of the Poor and Distressed Widows and Children of Presbyterian Ministers.” Picture that on your business card! Do you imagine there were agents traveling the dirt roads of Pennsylvania in those days making cold calls on Presbyterian ministers and their families? If there were, at least they didn’t get the old “My brother-in-law’s in the business — I buy all my insurance from him” objection! Incidentally, the history books are silent as to what it was that was distressing the poor Presbyterian ministers. Maybe it was the stress caused by all those Anglicans stirring up trouble with the mother country at the time!
In any case, from that humble beginning rose the huge financial services industry that today markets life and health insurance, mutual funds, variable products and others. The typical life insurance agent of today faces a huge challenge mastering complicated products, tax and legal issues affecting clients, and the ever encroaching technological revolution that is altering the agent’s job at a dizzying pace.
The first hundred or so years were not like this. In fact, even as late as the mid-19th century there were very few rules in place dealing with life insurance products, companies or agents (and no income tax at all). Most of the rules that did exist were those that the companies had built into their charters. Things began to change around 1840 when Elizur Wright, “the father of life insurance in America,” developed the first net valuation tables showing the amount of extra funds life insurance companies should have in reserve to meet future claims. Wright was a true believer in the reserve system and lobbied tirelessly for it. By 1858, he had managed to convince the Massachusetts legislature to pass his version of a legal reserve system. He soon became the head of a new Massachusetts insurance department — the first State Insurance Commissioner. He obviously was on to something because within a decade, 35 states had an insurance department. The age of insurance regulation was off and running.
During the next few decades, the insurance industry, fueled by relatively prosperous times and a young, rapidly expanding country, grew by leaps and bounds. By the beginning of the 20th century, the American insurance industry led the entire world in size with $7.5 billion of coverage in force. It sounds almost quaint by today’s standards, doesn’t it? But, as Senator Everett Dirksen might have said, it was “real money” in those days! The size and success of the life insurance industry attracted attention as the new century began, along with many other big businesses. The early 1900s found many businesses and business practices under a microscope, scrutinized by investigate journalists (the term “muckraker” was coined about this time). As you might have guessed, all insurance companies and agents had not been completely honest and forthright in their dealings during the preceding boom era and the muckraker’s scrutiny soon bore fruit.

