REPLACEMENT

One of the other evils uncovered by the Armstrong Investigation was the widespread replacement of life insurance policies by competing agents and/or companies. Perhaps the rebate frenzy of the times contributed. Replacement may be more of an ethics issue now than it was at the turn of the century. Remember, many of the policy provisions that we take for granted today came out of the Armstrong Investigation. Before 1906 there was no statutory requirement of guaranteed cash value (although some companies did offer it), no requirement to pay dividends annually, and no incontestability clause. Replacement of an existing life insurance policy for another may not have been as fraught with danger years ago as it is today. Today’s replacement can translate into real loss for the policyholder, especially if death occurs during the contestable period, or within the suicide exclusion period. Also, expenses associated with issuing new life insurance are typically “front loaded” into the policy design, meaning the policyholder who replaces his policy pays acquisition costs all over again.
Replacement is another one of those things that works against not only the consumer, but also the agent and the company. Widespread replacement ends up costing everyone. The consumer generally loses the benefit of cash value build-up and dividends from the existing policy, and the replaced company fails to realize the anticipated persistency it had calculated into premium rates at the time of issue. The agent who wrote the original policy loses a client and possibly renewal commissions. The company issuing the replacing policy sets itself up for future replacement when some other company begins paying a fraction of a percent higher interest or shares a few dollars off its premium. Again, replacement very often does more harm than good. This fact is probably the reason the practice, when not clearly in the best interest of the policyholder, is also known by another, not very flattering name, “twisting.”
Since replacement of an existing policy is not always bad for the policyholder, it is not outlawed completely by the States. Rather, replacement regulations tends to focus on disclosure. The theory is that if an agent intends to replace another company’s policy, he should disclose all pertinent information about both the new and old polices so the consumer can make an informed decision. Of course, the disclosure forms are just so much paper to the unscrupulous agent who is trying to make a sale at the expense of another agent and perhaps his client. You can require all the paperwork you want and the determined “twister” will get it completed and signed.

