THE NAIC ILLUSTRATION

The policy illustration boondoggle is a textbook example of how abuses within the industry backfire in the form of tightened regulation. Part of the fallout on the market conduct scandals of the past is increased effort by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) to reign in policy illustration abuse. Since it is impossible for the NAIC to examine every company’s illustrations and approve or disapprove them, it did the next best thing. It formed a committee that developed “standards” for policy illustrations that mandate how the illustration must be calculated and what assumptions are permitted. The new illustration regulation was introduced in 1995 and the requirements become law state-by-state, as each adopts the NAIC model regulation. Today, most States have adopted the NAIC model.
The result of the NAIC Life Insurance Illustrations Model Regulation is a more credible illustration and more consistency in how illustrations are constructed. Theoretically, a consumer can more accurately compare tow illustrations produced by different companies because both illustrations meet the same design criteria specified in the regulations. As a practical matter, understanding the illustration is probably more difficult, not less. There are more pages, more text and more numbers in the typical NAIC illustration. If disclosure is what the life insurance buying public wanted, with the model illustration regulation, they got it!
You have no doubt heard the old joke about how a camel is actually a horse that was designed by a committee. Well, the same rationale applies here. Try as they might, the NAIC committee is no more insulated from “group-think” and other committee phenomenon than are any other group of individuals. The NAIC illustration is an even more complex, more intimidating pile of paper than the illustrations it replaces. And to top it off, the illustration must be signed by the prospect and the agent. Not only that, the signed illustration must match exactly the insurance applied for. In other words, the agent cannot show the prospect an illustration for $100,000 of whole life and then take an application for $150,000; at least not without complicating the process. If the company issues the policy other than as illustrated, a new illustration must be given to the policyholder. The revised illustration must also be signed and dated.
In addition, every company that uses illustrations must identify one or more actuaries who will certify the illustration’s reasonableness. The purpose is to keep policy illustrated values to a level that can reasonably be attained by the company, given current interest rates and other factors. Mortality projections must be based on company experience, or industry experience if company experience is unavailable or not credible. Mortality charges cannot be projected to improve over the period illustrated, even if the company’s mortality is actually shown to be improving.
Again, the regulators, duly elected or appointed to represent insurance consumers, have done their duty. The model regulation states its purpose is “to provide rules for life insurance policy illustrations that will protect consumers and foster consumer education.” It was predictable. If companies and agents insist on playing games with illustrations, you can bet that at some point the regulators will step in to put a stop to it! This is not the first time the industry has been slapped around a bit and unfortunately it may not be the last.
So, we’ve come a long way in a couple of decades. From the pocket rate book and yellow legal pad to the signed and sealed NAIC illustration. Looking at an NAIC illustration, one is tempted to ask, “Is the consumer really better off with all of this “disclosure?’” But we, in the life insurance business, really have no right to ask such a question. The abuses of unscrupulous agents and companies have caused the situation to be as it is. And, as always, innocent companies and agents pay the price along with the bad apples. Rather than lamenting the state of things in our industry today, it is better to expend that energy looking for ways to head off the abuses of tomorrow.
There are a number of channels available to the honest company and agent to help combat field and home office market conduct problems and rebuild the public’s trust. Most of them have already been mentioned. Agents have the National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors (NAIFA) and the Society of Financial Service Professionals (SFSP), among other fine grass roots organizations. Companies have the American Council of Life Insurance, the Insurance Marketplace Standards Association, and other organizations. The future of our business requires honest individuals in the field and home office to band together and insist on high ethical standards by both company and agent. Anything less opens the door wide for the next round of committee-produced consumer protection actions.

