THE ARMSTRONG INVESTIGATION

In response to evidence of company and agent wrongdoing, in 1905 the New York Legislature commissioned a group of men, known as the Armstrong-Hughes Investigating Committee, to investigate the life insurance industry. By 1906, virtually all of the committee’s recommendations were law in the state of New York. The new rules were considered so sound that most other states quickly adopted their own version of the New York legislation. New regulations affected the way companies were organized and operated, how policies were structured (such well accepted policy provisions as guaranteed cash value, policy loan provisions, annual distributions of surplus and reduced paid-up insurance, grew out of the Armstrong Investigation) and how agents conducted their business. One of the agent behaviors that became the target of investigators was the common practice of rebating to applicants portions of the initial life insurance premium.
On the surface, rebating appeared to be no more than simple market-driven bargaining over the price of coverage. In actual practice, however, the practice led to many abuses by companies and agents in search of new business. An applicant for insurance, aware of the rebating practice, could simply contact a new agent every year and drive a bargain for a new policy and a new rebate. The applicant could continue to play this game until he was no longer considered insurable at which point he would be stuck with the last “bargain.” Because of the rebating practice, price was often the only criterion for purchasing a particular policy. The quality of the policy and the company was rarely a big factor in the decision to purchase. Also, the widespread practice of rebating adversely affected the pricing of insurance products because the resulting lapse ratios for new business caused big losses for life companies. Some companies even designed policies with large first year premiums or other gimmicks in an attempt to build in a cushion to allow for the rebate. Pity the poor insurance consumer who didn’t know he could bargain for the premium amount, or didn’t have good bartering skills and ended up paying full price! By not requesting a rebate, uninformed insurance consumers were subsidizing the rebating craze. Pity, too, the poor agent trying to make a living with prospects constantly chipping away at the commission.
All in all, rebating in the life insurance business ultimately proved to be a bad deal for everyone involved in the transaction. The Armstrong Investigation changed all that. Within a short time after the New York legislation was passed, every State in the union had a law against agent rebating of life insurance premiums. In the past few years, a couple of States have experimented with repealing anti-rebating laws, under the banner of “free market conduct,” but even where it is legal, rebating has not caught on to any real degree. Most agents are reluctant to sacrifice their commission, and most companies are not willing to get back into the rebating business. All of the reasons the Armstrong committee found to ban rebating are still with us today.

