THE INTRODUCTION INTERVIEW

Earlier as we discussed prospecting, it was mentioned that self-disclosure is a tool for building trust. It’s worth revisiting as we examine the ethics of introducing yourself and your company to a prospect.
To set the scene, let’s say that this is the first time you have met face to face with this particular prospect. You obtained the appointment using an honest, straightforward approach and you are finally eye-to-eye with the face that belongs to the voice you heard on the phone. But wait. We’re talking about ethics here, and ethics is rooted in empathy and the need to treat others as we want to be treated, right? Let’s turn the table, so to speak, and pursue the subject from the prospect’s point of view.
A producer obtaining an insurance license sometimes kills the brain cells associated with being a prospect. After a few days in the business, the typical insurance producer seems to have totally forgotten how it feels to be a prospect. Somehow, the new agent quickly becomes convinced that the way to handle prospects is to practice power phrases and snappy comebacks to questions and concerns raised by the prospect.
A producer must think back to the days when he or she was a prospect for insurance. If you were the typical prospect, you probably didn’t give insurance must thought, except when the agent called, and then your thoughts were probably along the lines of, “How do I get rid of this person?” In fact, I’ll bet that the first time you thought really seriously about insurance was soon after becoming an agent. Before the ink was dry on your contact, you purchased more insurance on yourself, didn’t you? Once you studied it and came to understand the value of owning insurance, you became excited about it and voluntarily became one of your very first sales. Great! I’d also bet that you thought to yourself, “Boy, I never realized all this great stuff about insurance. Everybody should know this. I’m going on a mission to talk to people about this and, once they understand it like I do, selling it will be no problem. And they’re going to pay me for this?”
The initial enthusiasm carried you for a while, but eventually reality set in and you may have lost some of that zeal. Selling insurance just isn’t as easy as you thought it was going to be. Part of the problem might be you forgot what it’s like to be a prospect! Almost every prospect you call on is back where you were before you began studying for the insurance license exam. No one is sitting by the phone waiting for you to call. When you do call, there is no reason to think prospects are just chomping at the bit to be educated about insurance. They’re not.
So let’s think through our interview situation from the prospect’s perspective. You’ve just walked into the prospect’s home, and you’re seated comfortably at the table. There is tension in the air. You’re about to launch into your best small talk. You think the prospect is wondering if your premium is competitive and your dividend scale up to snuff. You’re thinking, “I bet our premium waiver benefit is twice as good as anything he has with other companies.”
What does all of this have to do with ethics? Well, ethics requires empathy, empathy requires understanding, and you may no longer understand what it’s like to be a prospect. Putting yourself in the prospect’s shoes (demonstrating empathy) will do two things for you. It will help you align your purpose with your prospect’s needs and goals (the ethical Win/Win or No Deal approach we discussed earlier), and it will automatically give you powerful trust building tools, which will move you and the prospect toward the successful conclusion of the sale.

