
A producer acting on behalf of and placing insurance with an insurer is known as a(n) what?
A.Agent
B.Commissioner
C.Principal
D.Client

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A producer acting on behalf of an insurer is known as an insurance agent. Under the law of agency, they represent the insurance company rather than the customer.

Would you like to know more about the difference between agents and brokers, or how a producer's license works? Let me know how I can help!


What Is an Insurance Producer?
https://www.youtube.com/kaplanfinancialedu

https://www.kaplanfinancial.com/resources/getting-started/insurance-producer

An insurance producer sells insurance products to clients on behalf of an insurance company. It is a rewarding career with amazing growth potential. Becoming an insurance producer is also a great way to get started in finance or to make a much-needed career change. This article explains what an insurance producer does, shows you the differences between an insurance producer, agent, and broker, and describes how you can become a producer.

What an Insurance Producer Does
Insurance producers are licensed to sell and negotiate life, health, property, or other types of insurance offered by an insurance company. As an insurance producer, you may work for one insurance company only or represent multiple carriers.

Being a producer includes finding new clients and maintaining relationships with those you already have. Insurance producers need to be a reliable first point of contact when a client needs to file a claim or increase coverage due to major life events, like purchasing a new car or having a child. Other responsibilities include:

Calculating premiums and establishing payment methods

Monitoring insurance claims and helping clients settle them

Fulfilling all policy requirements

Customizing insurance programs to suit individual customer needs

Inspecting property to examine its overall condition and decide its insurance risk

Acting as an intermediary between a customer and the insurance company

Thinking about a career in insurance? Download this free Launching Your Insurance Career eBook.

