From:
XCEL Support
Date:06/17/2026 at 11:52 PM
Premier Financial Alliance New Enrollment - Yinhui Zhang
Hello Yinhui Zhang, Thank you for enrolling in the XCEL Solutions California Code and Ethics Pre-licensing course.

The state of California requires new insurance license applicants to complete 12 hours of education related to ethics, and the California Insurance Code, including 1 hour related to fraud. This course is designed to fulfill the 12-hours of ethics and the California Insurance Code, including fraud. XCEL Solutions will be tracking the time spent studying in the course. A Certificate of Completion will not be issued until the minimum hour requirements have been met.

NEW INSURANCE FRAUD TRAINING REGULATION

The California Department of Insurance (CDI) recently approved the Commissioner-appointed Curriculum Board's proposed revisions to the 12-Hour Ethics and California Insurance Code Educational Objectives (EO) to incorporate one hour of study on insurance fraud. This one-hour insurance fraud training is a part of, and not in addition to, the 12-hour pre-licensing ethics and three-hour ethics training requirement. The DOI's Enforcement Branch-Fraud Division recently launched a one-hour insurance fraud course called “Agents and Brokers Anti-Fraud Training” to meet this new ethics requirement.

IMPORTANT: This California Code and Ethics Pre-licensing course fulfills the 12-hour ethics requirement, including the 1-hour fraud training requirement.

WE ARE HERE TO HELP!

Our student support team can be reached at (866) 559-9235 or via email: support@xcelsolutions.com
You can also reach out to an instructor directly for specific content questions by emailing: instructor@xcelsolutions.com
CANDIDATE INFORMATION

Name: Yinhui Zhang
Phone 626 216 8856
Email: zyhnanau87@gmail.com
Department: Premier Financial Alliance
Hiring Manager:

Training Details

Training Name: California Code and Ethics Pre-licensing
Logging into Your Student Portal: You may access your training at https://my.xcelsolutions.com/portal/login/premierfinancialalliance
Your Username is: zyhnanau87@gmail.com
Please log in with the password you have set. If you have forgotten your password, click "Forgot your password?" on the login screen to create a new password.

Thank you,

The XCEL Solutions Team

If you have questions or need assistance during your training, our Customer Support team is available at (866) 559-9235 or support@xcelsolutions.com.

This email is auto-generated. Please do not respond.


