Chapter Exam_Ethics and The California Insurance Code

Chapter Exam


Multiple Choice

A.
B.
C.
D.

When an insurer is deemed insolvent, which of the following becomes the conservator of the insurance company business?
A.Commissioner of Insurance
B.Secretary of State
C.Attorney General
D.The parent company

The purpose of securing an insurance license is to make sure that a licensee is competent and trustworthy. The Department of Insurance may deny an application for an insurance license for all of the following reasons, EXCEPT:
A.The license candidate has been convicted of a misdemeanor
B.The license candidate aided another agent in an unfair practice
C.The license candidate has been convicted of a felony
D.The license candidate committed an act forbidden by the insurance code

The CIC protects consumers against insurers that attempt to settle claims unfairly. All of the following are unfair claim settlement practices, EXCEPT:
A.Requiring an insured to complete a claim form in order to receive payment
B.Forcing an insured to begin litigation when an insurer’s liability is clear
C.Failing to affirm or deny coverage in a reasonable time
D.Attempting to settle an insurance claim for less than the face amount

The CIC specifies that insurers may not offer free insurance or annuity contracts as an inducement to buy or rent any property or services. The regulation regarding free insurance applies to which of the following?
A.Insurance written in connection with a newspaper subscription
B.Insurance providing a death benefit for an individual
C.Any title insurance written in connection with a loan
D.Motor club insurance

Which of the following best describes an interview with a prospective client conducted under false pretenses in order to obtain information in connection with an insurance transaction?
A.Pretext interview
B.Prospective interview
C.Transitory interview
D.Fact finding interview

Review
Congratulations you passed with a score of 40% (2/5). Click the Exit button to close this course.





















