
BE ABLE TO IDENTIFY THAT THE CALIFORNIA INSURANCE CODE (CIC) AND THE CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS (CCR) IDENTIFY MANY UNETHICAL AND/OR ILLEGAL PRACTICES, BUT THE CIC AND CCR ARE NOT A COMPLETE GUIDE TO ETHICAL BEHAVIOR. (FOR EXAMPLE: CAL. INS. CODE SECTION 785)

State laws alone do not offer a model for how insurance business should be conducted in this State. However, ethical standards illustrated by a code of some kind or by the voluntary compliance of producers and insurers goes beyond the law and defines not only what insurers and producers must do, but what they should do.
The California Insurance Code and the California Code of Regulations identify numerous illegal sales and marketing practices. However, regulations pertaining to these illegal activities provide no descriptions of ethical behavior. Producers are held to an ethical standard by the insurers they represent and the experience they gain in their profession. Even though the California Insurance Code and the CCR identify many unethical and / or illegal practices, they are not a complete guide to ethical behavior.

BE ABLE TO PROVIDE EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF ETHICAL DILEMMAS THAT LICENSEES MIGHT FACE

There are primarily two types of cases where insurance sales professionals may find themselves facing an ethical dilemma. One is when the insurance need is uncomplicated and the agent is using a one-interview sales process, and the other is when the case is slightly more complex and requires more than one interview but does not require the help of other advisors.

In those two instances (the majority of most insurance agents’ work) there will be temptations to choose self-interest over client-interest. In the first scenario, where the situation is a simple insurance need, this step goes by pretty quickly. Once the agent has a few basic facts, it seems to take only a few micro-seconds to determine the product or products to propose. The agent may have a “favorite” product he likes to show in such cases. If the need is simple, let’s say it’s mortgage protection, and finances are a problem, the agent may have a favorite term insurance plan to purpose. Nothing wrong with that. Term life insurance can meet a need like mortgage protection quite satisfactorily.
A problem can arise, however, if the agent has two similar term plans to propose and one has higher premium and pays a higher commission. This is sometimes an example of a company placing the agent in the ethical dilemma by offering two plans like this. The company, in this case, is saying to the agent, “Here are two similar plans, one is good for your prospect, the other is good for you, you make the choice.” This approach reflects a company philosophy that apparently holds both the agent and the prospect in low regard.

In other cases, the agent may have access to two or more similar plans simply because he represents more than one company. In that case, it is up to the agent to decide which product to propose in a given situation. Here the solution falls squarely on the agent’s ability to apply ethics on the job. It would be very easy to sell the product that produces the most commission or leads to the most attractive sales convention. But ethical conduct rules call for the agent to use the product that best meets the needs of the client, based on the facts of the case — which the agent makes every effort to ascertain.

Now, in some cases, the facts of a particular case could tip the balance in favor of a higher premium product. For example, let’s assume you represent two companies, each with a similar term insurance product. One company’s premium is 10% higher than the other, but that company is more highly rated and offers a conversion to a higher quality permanent insurance product. If your prospect has a need for term insurance now but may want to convert it to permanent insurance later, the higher-price product may very well be the better, more ethical, choice. The test is simple enough. Put yourself in the prospect’s shoes. If it was you, and your situation matched the prospect’s, would you be happier with the higher-priced, high quality product, or would you choose the low cost alternative? Your gut-feeling answer to that question tells you if you are doing the right thing for the right reason.
So premium and commission are not the only factors to consider when facing a choice such as this. Always choose the product that works bests for the person you are serving and you will never go wrong. The commission will take care of itself. There’s nothing wrong with having a “favorite” product for a given situation, but make sure it’s your favorite plan for the right reasons.

In the second scenario, where the client situation is more complicated requiring you to work out a solution “back at the office,” there is even more potential for an ethical dilemma. Now you have all the resources at your disposal, and the luxury of time, to really study the impact of commission results and other sales incentives. You could easily develop several solutions, calculate your personal return on each, and then propose the one that best meets your needs. This is not at all what is meant by “needs selling!”

A good method for keeping the proper ethical perspective on a case is to prepare two or three solutions (gold, silver and bronze) and let the prospect decide which solution is best. Using this popular approach leaves you feeling good about the sale because you know you’ve laid out all the cards and helped your prospect make an informed choice. And, as every experienced salesperson knows, it’s much better sales psychology to offer options than to present a simple “take it or leave it” choice to prospects. To summarize, you know you are acting ethically when you can honestly say to yourself, on your way to a closing interview, “I don’t know, and I don’t care, how much I will earn from this sale.”

BE ABLE TO IDENTIFY SPECIAL ETHICAL CONCERNS THAT MAY OCCUR WHEN DEALING WITH SENIOR CITIZENS REGARDING PRETEXT INTERVIEWS, SECTION 791.03 OF THE CIC.

Section 791.03 of the CIC states that an insurance producer has a greater fiduciary responsibility when dealing with senior citizens. Greater ethical concerns are associated with seniors due to their susceptibility to deceptive practices. One illustration of this involves pretext interviews. These are interviews that are conducted under false pretenses. The CIC does not permit the use of pretext interviews in order to obtain information that may be used in an insurance transaction.

