BE ABLE TO IDENTIFY AND APPLY

BE ABLE TO IDENTIFY AND APPLY:
FIDUCIARY RESPONSIBILITY [CIC SECTIONS 1733-1735]

Sections 1733 through 1735 of the CIC states that insurance producers are required to act in a fiduciary capacity when engaging in any insurance transaction. State law requires that producers act ethically and according to professional standards when engaging in insurance activities.
Any producer is required to act in a fiduciary capacity when collecting premiums or dealing with the public. This means that all producers possess a fiduciary responsibility when engaging in insurance transactions. A “fiduciary” is a person occupying a position of special trust and confidence, usually one holding the funds or items of value of another under his or her personal care, custody or control. A producer possesses the duty to act honestly with applicants for insurance coverage and to represent his or her insurer faithfully. Therefore, a producer possesses financial and professional responsibilities. All funds received by a producer must be held in a fiduciary capacity. Anyone who diverts or misappropriates such funds is guilty of theft. A licensed producer who receives fiduciary funds has three options including:

• remit them to the insurer less any commissions;
• deposit the funds in a trustee or premium trust account; or
• maintain the funds in U.S. Government securities or bonds or some similar issue.

Additional funds may be commingled with fiduciary funds to advance premiums, establish reserves or pay other commissions.

Again, producers must represent the insurer and their clients in a fiduciary capacity. For example, any premiums collected by an agent must be submitted to the insurer. They cannot be used for personal use or commingled with a personal account. An agent is also required to follow and adhere to the insurer’s underwriting rules and guidelines. Unless premium notices are billed directly to an insured by an insurer or agency, the agent generally collects insurance premiums.

CONTINUING EDUCATION (CE) REQUIREMENTS [CIC SECTION 1749.3 & 10234.93]

Life Only / Accident & Health or Sickness Only Agents and Property or Casualty broker-agents are required to complete 24 hours of continuing education credit hours every 2 years for their license renewal. As of 1/1/14, three (previously four) of the 24 hours must be ethics related. CE hours required are per person (not per line), meaning that life-only agents or accident and health or sickness agents that are also licensed as a property broker-agent and/or casualty broker-agent are still only required to complete 24 hours of continuing education each two-year license renewal period.

Agents that intend to sell annuity products:

• must take an initial, one-time 8-hour State approved Annuity training program prior to selling annuity products; and
• must take four (4) hours of approved ongoing annuity training every two (2) years thereafter. These hours also count toward the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour Continuing Education requirement.

This total number of hours of CE requirements are not increased by the following requirements for agents selling long-term care insurance and agents writing California Partnership coverage. Section 1749 of the CIC also states that when applicable, those hours of CE requirements can be absorbed into these. All licenses expire every two (2) years on the last day of the license issue month.

The CIC also states that all agents and brokers must complete an initial one time 8 hour State approved LTC training course before he or she can sell long-term care insurance. The program must address topics related to long-term care services and insurance, including LTC facilities, changes or improvements in services or facilities, alternatives to the purchase of private LTC insurance and California regulations and requirements. Producers selling long-term care insurance are subject to a LTC CE requirement according to Section 10234.93. The following continuing education requirement described is part of, not in addition to, an agent’s or broker’s regular CE requirement. Further, an agent licensed less than four (4) years must complete eight hours of approved, ongoing LTC training each year for the first four (4) years of their licensure. Agents licensed more than four (4) years must take eight (8) hours of approved, ongoing LTC training every two (2) years thereafter. Again, such hours count toward the two-year, 24 hour C.E. requirement.

Agents that intend to sell California Long-Term Care Partnership (LTCP) products must complete an initial, one time 16-hour State approved LTCP program (8 hours if one is going to write LTCP products and 8 for LTC products offered by insurers) prior to selling LTCP products. Eight (8) of these 16 hours must be completed in a formal classroom setting and the remaining hours can be completed self-study. Agents licensed less than 4 years must take 8 hours of approved, ongoing classroom training each year for the first 4 years of their licensure. Agents licensed more than 4 years must take 8 hours of approved, ongoing classroom training every 2 years thereafter. Again, hours count toward the 2 year, 24 hour requirement. The California Partnership for Long-Term Care is a pilot program designed to help citizens protect a portion of their assets and still qualify for Medi-Cal assistance.

The following Educational Objective is derived from the codes of ethics of major industry organizations and is the basis for licensing examination questions.
