REPORTING OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS AND CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS [CIC SECTION 1729.2]

Section 1729.2 requires all licensees and applicants for licenses issued by the California Department of Insurance (CDI) to report any administrative actions or criminal convictions to it within thirty (30) days of the final disposition of the matter. This regulatory information applies to both resident and nonresident licensees and applicants.

The following information must be reported to the CDI within thirty days of the final disposition of the matter:

• misdemeanor or felony convictions;
• a filing of felony criminal charges in State or Federal court;
• an administrative action regarding a professional or occupational license;
• a licensee’s discharge, or attempt to discharge, in a personal or organizational bankruptcy proceeding, an obligation regarding any insurance premiums or fiduciary funds owed to any company, including a premium finance company or managing general agent; or
• any admission, or judicial finding or determination of fraud, misappropriation or conversion of funds, misrepresentation, or breach of fiduciary duty.

THE FILING OF A NOTICE OF APPOINTMENT, SECTION 1704 THROUGH 1705 OF THE CIC;

AGENT APPOINTMENTS AND LICENSE CONTINUATION [CIC SECTION 1704-1705]

An agent is any person who sells, solicits, or negotiates insurance contracts for compensation on behalf of an insurer. This includes submitting applications to the insurer, collecting premiums, and delivering policies to policyowners. Each agency that transacts insurance must be licensed by the insurance department.
The authority to transact insurance under an appointment becomes effective as of the date the notice of appointment is signed. A licensee may not transact insurance business in California until the licensee is appointed by an insurer. Each appointment shall continue in force until cancellation or expiration of the license applied for or held at the time of appointment, or the filing of a notice of termination by the appointing insurer, agent or broker, or the appointed person.
Upon termination of all an agent’s appointments, all endorsements naming the licensee on the license of an organization license, and/or the cancellation of the required bond if acting as a broker, the agent’s permanent license will not be canceled, but become inactive. The license may still be renewed as normal. The license may be reactivated at any time before its expiration date by the filing of a new appointment or the filing of a new bond if acting as a broker. The holder of an inactive license is not allowed to transact any insurance business for which an active, valid license is required.
Every property broker-agent, casualty broker-agent, personal lines broker-agent, or limited lines automobile insurance agent acting in the capacity of an insurance solicitor shall have filed on his or her behalf with the commissioner a notice executed by an insurance agent or insurance broker appointing and agreeing to employ the solicitor as an employee within this state.
If an insurer, property broker-agent, or casualty broker-agent files a notice of appointment on behalf of an applicant for an original license, and the applicant does not proceed to become licensed under state law, the act of filing the notice will still be deemed to have affirmed that:
• The applicant is of good reputation; and
• The applicant is worthy of the license sought

When an applicant for an agent license is a co-partnership, corporation, or association, the insurer filing the appointment will be considered to have made the same two affirmations in regards to both the business organization as well as each person whose name appears in the application who wish to use the powers of the license sought.

An insurer, property broker-agent, or casualty broker-agent, by filing a notice of appointment on behalf of an applicant for an original license to act as a life agent, property broker-agent, casualty broker-agent, or insurance solicitor, will be considered to have affirmed that the applicant has had experience, instruction in classes of insurance, or will be given the necessary instruction within 30 days after the issuance of the license for transactions that are authorized by the license being applied for. This statute applies if the applicant is not issued a certificate of convenience during the examination period of the license application. If the applicant for licensure is a co-partnership, corporation, or association, the insurer will only be considered to have made these affirmations in regards to the person or persons initially named on the organization’s license.

Whenever a co-partnership, corporation, or association licensed as a life agent, property broker-agent, or casualty broker-agent files to add a person to any license to exercise the agency powers the license grants, the business organization will be deemed to have made the same affirmations regarding the newly added person that are required of an insurer filing a notice of appointment on behalf of an applicant for an original license.

INSURERS AND APPLICATIONS FROM NON-APPOINTED LIFE AGENTS

A licensed life agent is allowed to present proposals to, and transmit applications for insurance for, prospective policyholders on behalf of a life insurer, even if that agent is not currently appointed by that insurer. If a policy of insurance is issued after application is made by the non-appointed agent, then the insurer is considered to have authorized the agent to act on its behalf and the insurer is responsible for all actions of the agent that relate to the application and policy as if the agent was appointed by the insurer.
Within fourteen (14) days after an insurer issues a policy in response to an application from a life agent not currently appointed by the insurer, the insurer must forward to the Commissioner a notice of appointment authorizing that life agent as an agent of the insurer. An insurer is not required to actually accept an application from a life agent or issue a policy based on the application.
However, if an insurer requires that all of its life agents represent only that insurer, or a group of affiliated insurers that the insurer is a member of, then a life agent not appointed by that insurer may not present proposals to, or transmit applications for insurance for, prospective policyholders on behalf of that insurer.

TERMINATION OR CANCELLATION OF A LICENSE [CIC SECTION 1708-1712.5]

Section 1708 states that a licensee may at any time surrender for cancellation any license under which he or she is permitted to act in any of the capacities specified in the CIC. If the license is in the possession of the licensee, surrender may be accomplished by the delivery of the document itself to the Commissioner. If the license is in the possession of the insurer or the licensee's employer, the licensee may nevertheless make such surrender by written notice delivered to the Commissioner.
Sections 1708 through 1712.5 also state that all licenses terminate upon the death of the licensee. In the case of an organization that is licensed, the following will serve to make it ineligible to hold an insurance license: the dissolution of a copartnership or any change in membership of a copartnership; the termination of an association; or the dissolution of a corporation. If the organization is a partnership, the surviving or continuing copartnership may continue to transact insurance under the license until action is taken by the Commissioner on the application if such application is signed by a general partner. The license of any organization licensed as a life insurance agent becomes inoperative upon the removal or termination of the last natural person named in it, or when the last natural person is no longer eligible to be named.

